README.md, before:

# CitcomS with Data Assimilation

## Reference

Bower, D.J., M. Gurnis, and N. Flament (2015), Assimilating lithosphere and slab history in 4-D Earth models, Phys. Earth Planet. Inter., 238, 8-22, doi: 10.1016/j.pepi.2014.10.013.

The manuscript is also available in an open access repository: https://eartharxiv.org/9aey5/

## Installation

### Quick start for a cluster

This version of CitcomS only requires a valid MPI distribution (no more python / pyre).  Most clusters can load an MPI distribute using `modules`

For example, at the University of Bern I use:

```module load iomkl/2018b```

For reasons relating to compilers, the cluster and node setup, some mpi versions may be preferred for your particular cluster.

To install CitcomS v3.3.1 with data assimilation go to `src/` and execute

```./mymake.py```

For this step you need a python distribution, but this is only to run the commands that configure and make Citcoms.  Python is not actually used for running the code.  Note that the other directories with a prefix of `src_` relate to older versions of the code and should not be used.  They are kept for reference only.

Example input and output configuration files are provided in:

```examples/```

This example is a good one to try and run first:

```src/examples/Full```

You will need to setup your job submission script.  See a slurm example in jobsubmit/  Please add your own submission scripts to the same directory so we have more examples

IMPORTANT: This code *only* implements assimilation in the CitcomS code.  There are other python scripts that generate the *input* data and these are stored in a different svn repository hosted at Caltech. 

You may receive a locale setting warning from Perl.  See here for the reason and fix:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2499794/how-to-fix-a-locale-setting-warning-from-perl

### Quick start for Mac OSX

Note that the following instructions assume you have MacPorts (https://www.macports.org) installed.  In principle you can use either Open MPI or MPICH as an MPI distribution to run CitcomS.  However, unfortunately the LLDB (debugger) prefers Open MPI, whereas valgrind prefers MPICH.  Therefore I install both MPI distributions and switch between them using ```sudo port select --set mpi```.

#### Install build tools:

```sudo port install automake autoconf libtool```

Note that you should use the command ```glibtoolize```, since ```libtool``` already exists on Mac OSX although it is not the GNU version.  So MacPorts uses a program name transform.  This means you should replace ```libtoolize``` in ```mymake.py``` with ```glibtoolize```.

#### MPI option 1. Install Open MPI and HDF5 (later is probably optional):

```sudo port install openmpi```

```sudo port install hdf5 +openmpi```

```sudo port select --set mpi openmpi-mp-fortran```

#### and/or MPI option 2. Install MPICH

```sudo port install mpich```

```sudo port select --set mpi mpich-mp-fortran```

#### mymake.py

To compile on a Mac, ensure you have edited ```mymake.py``` as follows:

1. Replace ```libtoolize``` with ```glibtoolize```
1. (Optional) Add ```CFLAGS=-g -O0 CXXFLAGS=-g -O0``` to the compile command.  This ensures that valgrind and LLDB will be able to identify line numbers of problematic code precisely.

#### Install valgrind (memory leak checker):

```sudo port install valgrind-devel```

or install version 3.14 from the website

#### Install LLDB (debugger)

This comes with Xcode

#### To run a uniprocessor job:

```mpirun -np 1 CitcomSRegional input.sample```

## Features that are implemented

A data assimilation manual is hosted in an svn repository located at ```https://svn.gps.caltech.edu/repos/docs/data_assimilation```.  This manual contains information about the parameters that are used, both for the convection code and also the pre- and post-processing scripts.  Access to the svn can be requested.  Some options in the manual might be out-dated, so prioritise the options in this README.

### Slab and lithosphere assimilation (grep for 'DJB SLAB')
1. ```lith_age_depth_function``` (bool)
1. ```lith_age_exponent``` (double)
1. ```lith_age_min``` (double)
1. ```lith_age_stencil_value``` (double)
1. ```slab_assim``` (bool)
1. ```slab_assim_file``` (char)
1. ```sten_temp``` as an output option (char)
1. ```internal_vbcs_file``` (bool)
1. ```velocity_internal_file``` (char)
1. ```sten_velo``` as an output option (char)

### Composition (grep for 'DJB COMP')
1. ```hybrid_method``` (bool)
1. increased memory for tracer arrays (icushion parameter)
1. turn off tracer warnings using ```itracer_warnings=off``` in input cfg file

### Viscosity structures (grep for 'DJB VISC')
1. case 20, used in Flament et al. (2013, 2014)
1. case 21, used in Flament et al. (2014), model TC8
1. case 22, used in Flament et al. (2014), model TC7
1. case 23, used in Flament et al. (2014), model TC9
1. case 24, used in Zhang et al. (2010) and Bower et al. (2013)
1. case 25, used by Flament for Extendend-Boussinesq (EBA) models
1. case 26, used by Flament for EBA models
1. case 27, used by Flament for EBA models
1. case 28, used by Flament for EBA models
1. case 112, used by Hassan
1. case 113, used by Hassan
1. case 117, used by Hassan
1. case 118, used by Hassan

### Output time (grep for 'DJB TIME')
1. output data in regular increments of age (Myr) as well as/rather than number of time steps
    - ```storage_spacing_Myr``` (int)
    - if you only want to output data by age (Ma), you should set ```storage_spacing``` to a large integer value in order to suppress the regular time outputs
    - both ```storage_spacing_Myr``` and ```storage_spacing``` can be used together, in which case data is output whenever either one of these output criterion is satisfied
1. exit time loop when the model reaches negative ages (currently hard-coded to be <0 Ma)
    - ```exit_at_present``` (bool)
    
### Extended-Boussinesq modifications (grep for 'DJB EBA')
1. depth-dependent scaling for the dissipation number (Di)
    - Di is typically defined at the surface, using surface values of alpha, cp, and g
    - a depth-dependent scaling (typically between 0 and 1) is introduced to additionally scale Di
    - this scales Di in the energy equation, i.e. the adiabatic, viscous, and latent heating terms
    - useful to avoid intense shear heating near the surface and hence avoid artefacts when using data assimilation  
2. Therefore, an extra column is added to the ```refstate_file```:
    - [column 1] rho
    - [column 2] gravity
    - [column 3] thermal expansion coefficient (alpha)
    - [column 4] heat capacity
    - [column 5] dissipation number scaling

### Output (grep for 'DJB OUT')
1. Composition and temperature spherical harmonics as an output option (char).  See issue, since output for comp only occurs for the last comp field.
    - ```comp_sph```
    - ```temp_sph```
1. Temperature and internal velocity stencil for slab assimilation
    - ```sten_temp```
    - ```sten_velo```
1. Tracer density at the nodes (originally written by Ting Yang)
    - ```tracer_dens```
1. Divergence (div/v) at the nodes.  Useful for debugging convergence issues.
    - ```divv```
1. Fixed pid file output for lith_age_min, z_interface, and output_optional
1. Fixed various valgrind uninitialised variable warnings relating to the writing of the pid file

### Topography (grep for 'DJB TOPO')
1. Parameter to remove buoyancy above a given znode for computing dynamic topography
    - ```remove_buoyancy_above_znode``` (int)

### Ultra-low velocity zone (grep for 'DJB ULVZ")
1. Modifications to enable ULVZ modelling as in Bower et al. (2011).  These amendments will not affect the data assimilation.
    - domain volumes for absolute tracer method for different initial ULVZ volumes
    - permeable domain for regional models
    - sine perturbation for initial temperature

## Dan's work area follows

### Rakib's code

Sent to me by Sabin (12/09/17) CitcomSModDtopoRelease\_Rakib.zip
See diff/ directory for complete record

1. Advection\_diffusion
    - Scaled visc and adiabatic heating by Di (COMPLETE)
1. convection\_variables.h
    - blob\_profile
    - silo parameters
    - mantle\_temp\_adiabatic\_increase
1. global\_defs.h
    - Shell-output facility
1. Initial\_temperature.c
    - bunch of silo / blob related functions  
    - evidentally seeding plumes for the IC
1. Material\_properties.c
    - refstate updates (COMPLETE)
1. Output.c
    - outputs of shells (theta, phi, r, temperature, vr)
1. Output\_vtk.c
    - perhaps not related to Rakib's work
1. Viscosity\_structures.c
    - some new viscosity structures (case 112, 113, 117, 118) (COMPLETE)

### Code features NOT implemented

1. reverse gravity acceleraton (added by Ting, see svn r76) for SBI
   note that this appears to have been subsequently removed in r88?

### Log of features implemented from legacy code
1. Adv\_diff -> COMPLETE
1. BC\_util -> COMPLETE
1. Composition\_related.c -> COMPLETE
1. composition\_related.h -> COMPLETE
1. Convection.c -> COMPLETE
1. Element\_calculations -> COMPLETE
1. Full\_boundary\_conditions -> COMPLETE
1. Full\_lith\_age\_read\_files -> COMPLETE
1. Full_read_input_from_file -> COMPLETE
1. Full\_solver.c -> COMPLETE
1. global\_defs.h -> COMPLETE
1. Instructions.c -> COMPLETE
1. Lith\_age.c -> COMPLETE
1. output.c -> COMPLETE
1. Pan\_problem.c -> COMPLETE
1. Problem\_related.c -> COMPLETE
1. Regional\_boundary\_conditions.c -> COMPLETE
1. Regional\_lith\_age\_read\_files -> COMPLETE
1. Regional\_read\_input\_files -> COMPLETE
1. Regional\_solver -> COMPLETE
1. solver.h -> COMPLETE
1. Stokes\_flow\_incom -> divv calculation for output COMPLETE
1. tracer\_defs.h -> COMPLETE
1. Viscosity\_structure.c -> COMPLETE

plume detection code from Rakib Hassan's thesis work can be found here
https://github.com/rh-downunder/plume-tracker

Commit message:

add instructions for loading modules for NCI Aus

README.md, after:

# CitcomS with Data Assimilation

## Reference

Bower, D.J., M. Gurnis, and N. Flament (2015), Assimilating lithosphere and slab history in 4-D Earth models, Phys. Earth Planet. Inter., 238, 8-22, doi: 10.1016/j.pepi.2014.10.013.

The manuscript is also available in an open access repository: https://eartharxiv.org/9aey5/

## Installation

### Quick start for a cluster

This version of CitcomS only requires a valid MPI distribution (no more python / pyre).  Most clusters can load an MPI distribute using `modules`

For example, at the University of Bern I use:

```module load iomkl/2018b```

For NCI Australia:

```module load openmpi```
```module load python2```

Note that loading python2 is only necessary for running the ```mymake.py``` script below (python is not used by CitcomS itself).

For reasons relating to compilers, the cluster and node setup, some mpi versions may be preferred for your particular cluster.

To install CitcomS v3.3.1 with data assimilation go to `src/` and execute

```./mymake.py```

For this step you need a python distribution, but this is only to run the commands that configure and make Citcoms.  Python is not actually used for running the code.  Note that the other directories with a prefix of `src_` relate to older versions of the code and should not be used.  They are kept for reference only.

Example input and output configuration files are provided in:

```examples/```

This example is a good one to try and run first:

```src/examples/Full```

You will need to setup your job submission script.  See a slurm example in jobsubmit/  Please add your own submission scripts to the same directory so we have more examples

IMPORTANT: This code *only* implements assimilation in the CitcomS code.  There are other python scripts that generate the *input* data and these are stored in a different svn repository hosted at Caltech. 

You may receive a locale setting warning from Perl.  See here for the reason and fix:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2499794/how-to-fix-a-locale-setting-warning-from-perl

### Quick start for Mac OSX

Note that the following instructions assume you have MacPorts (https://www.macports.org) installed.  In principle you can use either Open MPI or MPICH as an MPI distribution to run CitcomS.  However, unfortunately the LLDB (debugger) prefers Open MPI, whereas valgrind prefers MPICH.  Therefore I install both MPI distributions and switch between them using ```sudo port select --set mpi```.

#### Install build tools:

```sudo port install automake autoconf libtool```

Note that you should use the command ```glibtoolize```, since ```libtool``` already exists on Mac OSX although it is not the GNU version.  So MacPorts uses a program name transform.  This means you should replace ```libtoolize``` in ```mymake.py``` with ```glibtoolize```.

#### MPI option 1. Install Open MPI and HDF5 (later is probably optional):

```sudo port install openmpi```

```sudo port install hdf5 +openmpi```

```sudo port select --set mpi openmpi-mp-fortran```

#### and/or MPI option 2. Install MPICH

```sudo port install mpich```

```sudo port select --set mpi mpich-mp-fortran```

#### mymake.py

To compile on a Mac, ensure you have edited ```mymake.py``` as follows:

1. Replace ```libtoolize``` with ```glibtoolize```
1. (Optional) Add ```CFLAGS=-g -O0 CXXFLAGS=-g -O0``` to the compile command.  This ensures that valgrind and LLDB will be able to identify line numbers of problematic code precisely.

#### Install valgrind (memory leak checker):

```sudo port install valgrind-devel```

or install version 3.14 from the website

#### Install LLDB (debugger)

This comes with Xcode

#### To run a uniprocessor job:

```mpirun -np 1 CitcomSRegional input.sample```

## Features that are implemented

A data assimilation manual is hosted in an svn repository located at ```https://svn.gps.caltech.edu/repos/docs/data_assimilation```.  This manual contains information about the parameters that are used, both for the convection code and also the pre- and post-processing scripts.  Access to the svn can be requested.  Some options in the manual might be out-dated, so prioritise the options in this README.

### Slab and lithosphere assimilation (grep for 'DJB SLAB')
1. ```lith_age_depth_function``` (bool)
1. ```lith_age_exponent``` (double)
1. ```lith_age_min``` (double)
1. ```lith_age_stencil_value``` (double)
1. ```slab_assim``` (bool)
1. ```slab_assim_file``` (char)
1. ```sten_temp``` as an output option (char)
1. ```internal_vbcs_file``` (bool)
1. ```velocity_internal_file``` (char)
1. ```sten_velo``` as an output option (char)

### Composition (grep for 'DJB COMP')
1. ```hybrid_method``` (bool)
1. increased memory for tracer arrays (icushion parameter)
1. turn off tracer warnings using ```itracer_warnings=off``` in input cfg file

### Viscosity structures (grep for 'DJB VISC')
1. case 20, used in Flament et al. (2013, 2014)
1. case 21, used in Flament et al. (2014), model TC8
1. case 22, used in Flament et al. (2014), model TC7
1. case 23, used in Flament et al. (2014), model TC9
1. case 24, used in Zhang et al. (2010) and Bower et al. (2013)
1. case 25, used by Flament for Extendend-Boussinesq (EBA) models
1. case 26, used by Flament for EBA models
1. case 27, used by Flament for EBA models
1. case 28, used by Flament for EBA models
1. case 112, used by Hassan
1. case 113, used by Hassan
1. case 117, used by Hassan
1. case 118, used by Hassan

### Output time (grep for 'DJB TIME')
1. output data in regular increments of age (Myr) as well as/rather than number of time steps
    - ```storage_spacing_Myr``` (int)
    - if you only want to output data by age (Ma), you should set ```storage_spacing``` to a large integer value in order to suppress the regular time outputs
    - both ```storage_spacing_Myr``` and ```storage_spacing``` can be used together, in which case data is output whenever either one of these output criterion is satisfied
1. exit time loop when the model reaches negative ages (currently hard-coded to be <0 Ma)
    - ```exit_at_present``` (bool)
    
### Extended-Boussinesq modifications (grep for 'DJB EBA')
1. depth-dependent scaling for the dissipation number (Di)
    - Di is typically defined at the surface, using surface values of alpha, cp, and g
    - a depth-dependent scaling (typically between 0 and 1) is introduced to additionally scale Di
    - this scales Di in the energy equation, i.e. the adiabatic, viscous, and latent heating terms
    - useful to avoid intense shear heating near the surface and hence avoid artefacts when using data assimilation  
2. Therefore, an extra column is added to the ```refstate_file```:
    - [column 1] rho
    - [column 2] gravity
    - [column 3] thermal expansion coefficient (alpha)
    - [column 4] heat capacity
    - [column 5] dissipation number scaling

### Output (grep for 'DJB OUT')
1. Composition and temperature spherical harmonics as an output option (char).  See issue, since output for comp only occurs for the last comp field.
    - ```comp_sph```
    - ```temp_sph```
1. Temperature and internal velocity stencil for slab assimilation
    - ```sten_temp```
    - ```sten_velo```
1. Tracer density at the nodes (originally written by Ting Yang)
    - ```tracer_dens```
1. Divergence (div/v) at the nodes.  Useful for debugging convergence issues.
    - ```divv```
1. Fixed pid file output for lith_age_min, z_interface, and output_optional
1. Fixed various valgrind uninitialised variable warnings relating to the writing of the pid file

### Topography (grep for 'DJB TOPO')
1. Parameter to remove buoyancy above a given znode for computing dynamic topography
    - ```remove_buoyancy_above_znode``` (int)

### Ultra-low velocity zone (grep for 'DJB ULVZ")
1. Modifications to enable ULVZ modelling as in Bower et al. (2011).  These amendments will not affect the data assimilation.
    - domain volumes for absolute tracer method for different initial ULVZ volumes
    - permeable domain for regional models
    - sine perturbation for initial temperature

## Dan's work area follows

### Rakib's code

Sent to me by Sabin (12/09/17) CitcomSModDtopoRelease\_Rakib.zip
See diff/ directory for complete record

1. Advection\_diffusion
    - Scaled visc and adiabatic heating by Di (COMPLETE)
1. convection\_variables.h
    - blob\_profile
    - silo parameters
    - mantle\_temp\_adiabatic\_increase
1. global\_defs.h
    - Shell-output facility
1. Initial\_temperature.c
    - bunch of silo / blob related functions  
    - evidentally seeding plumes for the IC
1. Material\_properties.c
    - refstate updates (COMPLETE)
1. Output.c
    - outputs of shells (theta, phi, r, temperature, vr)
1. Output\_vtk.c
    - perhaps not related to Rakib's work
1. Viscosity\_structures.c
    - some new viscosity structures (case 112, 113, 117, 118) (COMPLETE)

### Code features NOT implemented

1. reverse gravity acceleraton (added by Ting, see svn r76) for SBI
   note that this appears to have been subsequently removed in r88?

### Log of features implemented from legacy code
1. Adv\_diff -> COMPLETE
1. BC\_util -> COMPLETE
1. Composition\_related.c -> COMPLETE
1. composition\_related.h -> COMPLETE
1. Convection.c -> COMPLETE
1. Element\_calculations -> COMPLETE
1. Full\_boundary\_conditions -> COMPLETE
1. Full\_lith\_age\_read\_files -> COMPLETE
1. Full_read_input_from_file -> COMPLETE
1. Full\_solver.c -> COMPLETE
1. global\_defs.h -> COMPLETE
1. Instructions.c -> COMPLETE
1. Lith\_age.c -> COMPLETE
1. output.c -> COMPLETE
1. Pan\_problem.c -> COMPLETE
1. Problem\_related.c -> COMPLETE
1. Regional\_boundary\_conditions.c -> COMPLETE
1. Regional\_lith\_age\_read\_files -> COMPLETE
1. Regional\_read\_input\_files -> COMPLETE
1. Regional\_solver -> COMPLETE
1. solver.h -> COMPLETE
1. Stokes\_flow\_incom -> divv calculation for output COMPLETE
1. tracer\_defs.h -> COMPLETE
1. Viscosity\_structure.c -> COMPLETE

plume detection code from Rakib Hassan's thesis work can be found here
https://github.com/rh-downunder/plume-tracker
